# How I've Spent My Time

I finished up up month 1 of the exercises for the [Chaincode ₿OSS program](https://learning.chaincode.com/). Since the exercises are re-used in subsequent years I don't want to expose too any details, but the first few weeks went deep into Bitcoin and the later half into Lightning. I went pretty much all-out on these exercises to try to learn as much as I could as quickly as I could, and I am glad I did.

Among other things we:
- Wrote code to use the Bitcoin RPC interface.
- Wrote code to create bitcoin derived public and private keys.
- Wrote code to scan the blockchain and create a wallet.
- Wrote code to take some keys from that wallet and spend to single-sig and multi-sig addresses, as well as spend from multi-sig to another address and op-return messages. for this, the transactions were created as raw binaries.
- Wrote code to use the lightning rpc interface.
- Wrote code to route lightning transactions and calculate expirys, fees etc along the way.
- Wrote code to wrap lightning transactions including all of the associated keys, encryption, filler and hmacs in a lightning.

Looking back I am amazed at how much was crammed into just a month. It was one of the hardest things I've done in engineer, especially since I am new to programming Rust and decided to implement eveything, save for a few bash scripts, in Rust.

I recommend the ₿OSS program program if you want to learn about Bitcoin open source.

There's also a friendly community both in the ₿OSS program and at the [NYC BitDevs](https://bitdevs.org/) meetup. I went to BitDevs on Jan 30th and was surprised at how warm the welcome was as well as how low-ego the room was. A long-term Bitcoin maintainer spent time with me learning about me, talking about the ecosystem, and explaining his focus and how to add value.

Now in month two of the ₿OSS program I am picking some actual value to add. Originally I wanted to focus on lightning, but most of the lightning tasks were spoken for and I thought I'd pick up the easy looking task of integrating hardware acceleration into [rust-bitcoin](https://github.com/rust-bitcoin/rust-bitcoin/).

This has turned out to not be as easy as expected because the existing Rust [simd](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/simd/struct.Simd.html) library is still *nightly* and *unstable*, so it can't be integrated into rust-bitcoin which keeps compatability with Rust 1.63.0 (current version is 1.8+).

So I couldn't use SIMD native library support, but I did notice that the existing x86 implementation relied on [code from sha-intrinsics](https://github.com/noloader/SHA-Intrinsics/blob/master/sha1-x86.c), and there was [corresponding code for arm](https://github.com/noloader/SHA-Intrinsics/blob/master/sha256-arm.c). I wrote a [draft PR](https://github.com/rust-bitcoin/rust-bitcoin/pull/4045#issuecomment-2655490566) that implements sha-256 directly using arm hardware acceleration, and was able to increase the sha-256 speed on arm hardware by 6x.

```
rust-bitcoin git:(master) ✗ RUSTFLAGS='--cfg=bench' cargo +nightly bench sha256::benches::sha256
...
running 3 tests
test sha256::benches::sha256_10                   ... bench:          30.27 ns/iter (+/- 0.86) = 333 MB/s
test sha256::benches::sha256_1k                   ... bench:       2,902.97 ns/iter (+/- 88.68) = 352 MB/s
test sha256::benches::sha256_64k                  ... bench:     183,857.29 ns/iter (+/- 2,460.84) = 356 MB/s
...
rust-bitcoin git:(jr_aarch64_sha256) ✗ RUSTFLAGS='--cfg=bench' cargo +nightly bench sha256::benches::sha256
...
running 3 tests
test sha256::benches::sha256_10                   ... bench:           8.53 ns/iter (+/- 0.61) = 1250 MB/s
test sha256::benches::sha256_1k                   ... bench:         472.11 ns/iter (+/- 10.47) = 2169 MB/s
test sha256::benches::sha256_64k                  ... bench:      30,171.56 ns/iter (+/- 811.96) = 2172 MB/s
```

However even though this is a big performance win, I'm not sure if it can be implemented due to instability in Rust's arm/aarch64 sha256 instructions.

# What I've Learned
- Rust is an easier language than the impressions I got from the internet. My guess is that that is for the reasons:
  - The compiler has gotten better over time and there is less need for manual annoation.
  - Tooling has gotten better, especially rust-analyzer and LLMs, so you can get quick feedback on code in your editor, or even ask questions of code in your editor.
  - There's even [Zed](https://zed.dev/), an IDE writen in Rust and optimized for Rust development. Installing it saved me a few gigs of constant ram usage from VS code.
- Impressed at documentation and performance of the Rust ecosystem. At the same time surprised that because of Rust's focus on stability and safety its performance on all-out hardware optimized tasks like sha256 can still lag other languages in some contexts.

# What's Next
- Focus on adding value in the BTC ecosystem.
- Form an opinion of what I want to contribute to.

# Useful Links
- [Optimizing sha256 in rust](https://purplesyringa.moe/blog/recovering-garbled-bitcoin-addresses)
- [Adding simd to chacha20 in rust-bitcoin](https://blog.yonson.dev/log/2024-09-vol1/))
